Issue #37 for review (simple notebook) (#59)
EcoCommonsAustralia/notebooks: notebooks/Get Species data from multiple sorces (spocc).qmd

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EcoCommons-Australia-2024-2026/ec-notebook_site/main/images/notebooks_banner_withframe.png)

# Getting Shorebirds data in Australia Using Open Data and `spocc`

Author details: Abhimanyu Raj Singh

Editor details: Dr Sebastian Lopez Marcano

Contact details: support\@ecocommons.org.au

Copyright statement: This script is the product of the EcoCommons platform. Please refer to the EcoCommons website for more details: https://www.ecocommons.org.au/

> Date: February 2025

Reviewer: Please change to May 2025
```suggestion
Date: May 2025
```

# Script information

> This notebook was developed by the EcoCommons team to support researchers and conservationists in analyzing shorebird distribution data using open data sources. It demonstrates how to query, clean, visualize, and save species occurrence data using the `spocc` package in R.

Reviewer: Also add the reference to the package give the central focus on this package across the notebook. 
```suggestion
This notebook was developed by the EcoCommons team to support researchers and conservationists in analysing shorebird distribution data using open data sources. It demonstrates how to query, clean, visualise, and save species occurrence data using the `spocc` package in R.
```

Reviewer: Add in text reference

| Step 2       | Get Data                    | Define and Query Species                                   |
+--------------+-----------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| Step 3       | Data Cleaning and Filtering | Refine and Check                                           |
+--------------+-----------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| Step 4       | Data Visualisation          | Map                                                        |
+--------------+-----------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| Step 5       | Save data                   | Save as CSV and SHP                                        |
+--------------+-----------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------+

In the near future, this material may form part of comprehensive support materials available to EcoCommons users. If you have any corrections or suggestions to improve the efficiency, please [contact the EcoCommons](mailto:support@ecocommons.org.au) team.

> ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EcoCommons-Australia-2024-2026/ec-notebook_site/main/images/EC_breaker_nobackgoundcolor.png)

Reviewer: I dont know if this section is really required for this notebook. It made sense for the GLM notebook, but you are not running any SDMs here

# Set-up: R Environment and Packages

Before starting, ensure your environment is correctly set up. This process may take some time as several packages need to be installed.

## S.1 Set the working directory and create a folder for data.

Save the Quarto Markdown file (`.qmd`) to a folder of your choice, and then set the path to your folder as your working directory.

> ```{r}

Reviewer: please add chunk name

```

## S.2 Install and load essential libraries.

Install and load the required R packages. This step will automatically check for missing packages, install them if needed, and load them into the environment.

```{r install_libraries, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}

# Set CRAN mirror
options(repos = c(CRAN = "https://cran.rstudio.com/"))

# List of packages to check, install if needed, and load
packages <- c("spocc", "tidyverse", "leaflet", "sf", "rnaturalearth", "rnaturalearthdata")

# Function to display a cat message
cat_message <- function(pkg, message_type) {
  if (message_type == "installed") {
    cat(paste0(pkg, " has been installed successfully!\n"))
  } else if (message_type == "loading") {
    cat(paste0(pkg, " is already installed and has been loaded!\n"))
  }
}

# Install missing packages and load them
for (pkg in packages) {
  if (!requireNamespace(pkg, quietly = TRUE)) {
    install.packages(pkg)
    cat_message(pkg, "installed")
  } else {
    cat_message(pkg, "loading")
  }
  library(pkg, character.only = TRUE)
}

library(spocc)
library(tidyverse)
library(leaflet)
library(sf)
library(rnaturalearth)
library(rnaturalearthdata)
```

> ## Step 1 Overview and Conceptulisation : Notebook objective Taxon, location, predictors, scale

Reviewer: Please fix grammar mistakes here

# Introduction

Shorebirds are key indicators of wetland health. This notebook demonstrates how to use `spocc` to fetch and visualise species occurrence data for:

-   **Bar-tailed Godwit (*Limosa lapponica*)**
-   **Red-necked Stint (*Calidris ruficollis*)**
-   **Curlew Sandpiper (*Calidris ferruginea*)**

> These are long distance migratory shore birds which make their way to Australia and Tasmania, we will guide you how to check for species data through multiple available data collection.

Reviewer: Do you mean Australia mainland and Tasmania or should we edit this sentence a little bit more>

## Step 2 Get data: Listing our Bird species

> We use `spocc` to retrieve up to **500 occurrence records** per species from multiple data sources (GBIF, iNaturalist, OBIS).

Reviewer: Please think if the bold statements are required. in here and across the other md sections of this notebook.

> ```{r}

Reviewer: every chunk should have a name

# Define species of interest
species_list <- c("Limosa lapponica", "Calidris ruficollis", "Calidris ferruginea")

# Query multiple sources for species occurrences
species_data <- lapply(species_list, function(species) {
  occ(query = species, from = c("gbif", "inat", "obis"), limit = 500)
})

# Convert results to data frames
species_dfs <- lapply(species_data, function(data) occ2df(data$gbif))

# Assign species names
for (i in seq_along(species_dfs)) {
  species_dfs[[i]]$species <- species_list[i]
}

# Combine data into one dataframe
occurrences <- bind_rows(species_dfs)

## Preview Data
for (i in seq_along(species_list)) {
  cat("\nPreview of", species_list[i], "data:\n")
  print(head(species_dfs[[i]], 10))  # Print the first 10 rows of each species' data
}
```

## Step 3 Data Cleaning and Filtering

> We remove invalid coordinates and filter occurrences within **Australia’s boundary**.

Reviewer: make this text more informative. remember this a tutorial in some ways :)

> ```{r}

Reviewer: add chunk name

# Remove NA values for latitude and longitude
occurrences_clean <- occurrences %>%
  filter(!is.na(longitude) & !is.na(latitude))

# Load world countries and extract Australia
world <- ne_countries(scale = "medium", returnclass = "sf")
australia <- world %>% filter(admin == "Australia")

# Convert occurrences to a spatial object
occurrences_sf <- st_as_sf(occurrences_clean, coords = c("longitude", "latitude"), crs = 4326, remove = FALSE)

# Filter occurrences (approximate using Australia's boundary)
occurrences_aus <- st_intersection(occurrences_sf, australia)

# Print summary of filtered data
print(nrow(occurrences_aus))
print(head(occurrences_aus))
```

## Step 4 Data Visualisation

> We assign **EcoCommons theme colors** for better visualization 😉.

Reviewer: Recommend replacing this text with something more informative about what you are displaying

```{r}
# Define EcoCommons theme colors
ec_colors <- c("#509E2F", "#2F6C99", "#F39200") # Green, Blue, Orange

# Assign a color to each species
occurrences_aus$color <- factor(occurrences_aus$species, labels = ec_colors)

# Create an interactive map using Leaflet
leaflet(data = occurrences_aus) %>%
  addTiles() %>%
  addCircleMarkers(
    ~longitude, ~latitude, 
    radius = 3, color = ~color, 
    popup = ~species
  ) %>%
  addProviderTiles(providers$Esri.WorldImagery) %>%
  addLegend(
    "bottomright", 
    colors = ec_colors, 
    labels = species_list, 
    title = "Species"
  )

```

## Step 5 Save data for Analysis

We save the cleaned data in **CSV and Shapefile formats** for additional modeling and GIS analysis.

```{r}
# Save cleaned occurrence data to CSV

> write.csv(occurrences_aus, "shorebird_occurrences_AUS.csv", row.names = FALSE)

Reviewer: Please add the csv and shp into a data folder adn add it to the gitignore.
